How do I start saving money? Begin with expense tracking. The first step to start saving money is figuring out how much you spend. Keep track of all your expenses—that means every coffee, household item and cash tip, as well as regular monthly bills. Record your expenses however is easiest for you—a simple spreadsheet, free online spending tracker or app, or even pencil and paper. Once you have your data, organize the numbers by categories, such as gas, groceries and mortgage, and total each amount. Use your credit card and bank statements to make sure you’ve included everything.

How do I fit saving into my budget? Make savings a monthly expense. Now that you know what you spend in a month, you can begin to create a budget. Your budget should show what your expenses are relative to your income, so that you can plan your spending and limit overspending. Be sure to factor in expenses that occur regularly but not every month, such as car maintenance. Include a savings category in your budget and aim to save an amount that feels comfortable to you. Plan on eventually increasing your savings amount to up to 20 percent of your income.

How do I save money on a tight budget? Economize on wants. If you can’t save as much as you’d like, it might be time to cut back on expenses. You can get ideas on where to cut by seeing how your spending compares with everyone else’s.

Free Tips to save money:First identify nonessentials, such as entertainment and dining out, that you can spend less on. Then look for ways to reduce your fixed monthly expenses, such as your car insurance or cell phone plan. 
Other ways to save money every day include:Search for free activities,Use resources, such as community event listings, to find free or low-cost entertainment. Review recurring charges. Cancel subscriptions and memberships you don’t use—especially if they renew automatically.
Cook your meals
Plan to eat most of your meals at home, and research local restaurant deals for nights that you want to treat yourself.
Wait for less deals before you buy
When tempted by a nonessential purchase, wait a few days. You may realize the item was something you wanted rather than needed—and you can develop a plan to save for it.

What kinds of savings goals should I set?
Use goals to make saving meaningful. Working toward specific goals can be one of the most effective ways to save money because it puts a reward or accomplishment in sight. Start by thinking about what you might want to save for—both in the short term (one to three years) and the long term (four or more years). Then estimate how much money you’ll need and how long it might take you to save it.

Common short-term goals: Emergency fund (three to nine months of living expenses), vacation or down payment for a car

Common long-term goals: Down payment on a home or a remodeling project, your child’s education or retirement

An if/then plan is an exercise that can help you reach your savings goals. It helps you anticipate potential obstacles and then plan specific actions to address them. Here’s how put one together.

Quick tip
Set a small, achievable short-term goal for something that’s fun and goes beyond your monthly budget, such as a new smartphone or holiday gifts. Reaching smaller goals—and enjoying the reward you’ve saved for—can give you a psychological boost, making the payoff of saving more immediate and reinforcing the habit.

How do I decide which savings goals are most important?
Learn how to prioritize your savings goals to gain a clear idea of how to allocate your savings. After your expenses and income, your goals are likely to have the biggest impact on how you allocate your savings. For example, a common budgeting question is whether to pay down debt, save or invest. This interactive tool can help you decide.
Or let’s say you know you’re going to need to replace your car in the near future. You could start putting away money for a new vehicle now. Just be sure to incorporate long-term goals, too. It’s important that planning for retirement doesn’t take a back seat to shorter-term needs.

How do I grow the money I'm saving?
Put your savings to work. There are many savings and investment accounts suitable for short- and long-term goals. And you don’t have to pick just one. Look carefully at all the options and consider balance minimums, fees, interest rates, risk and how soon you’ll need the money. This information will help you choose the mix that works best for your goals.

Short-term goals
If you’ll need the money soon or need to be able to access it quickly, consider using these FDIC-insured deposit accounts:
A savings account
A certificate of deposit (CD), which locks in your money for a fixed period of time at a rate that is typically higher than that of a savings account

Long-term goals
If you’re saving for retirement or your child’s education, consider:
FDIC-insured individual retirement accounts (IRAs) or 529 plans, which are tax-efficient savings accounts
Securities, such as stocks or mutual funds. These investment products are available through investment accounts with a broker-dealer1

How can benefits at work help me save?
Many employers offer a number of benefits that can save you money and help you save. Chief among them are 401(k) plans, which allow you to make automatic contributions from each paycheck to a retirement plan. The contributions come out of your paycheck before taxes are withheld, and any investment earnings are not taxed until you withdraw them. A portion of each contribution is often matched by the employer. Other pre-tax benefits include Health Savings Accounts and Flexible Spending Accounts, which help you to set aside money for medical and child-care expenses.

Are there easy ways to save money through bank?
Almost all banks offer automated transfers between your checking and savings accounts. You can choose when, how much and where to transfer money or even split your direct deposit so that a portion of every paycheck goes directly into your savings account. The advantage: You don’t have to think about it, and you’re less likely to spend the money instead. Other easy savings tools include credit card rewards and spare change programs, which round up transactions to the nearest dollar and transfer the difference into a savings or investment account.

